## Ava seen in the Twilight

Our team is complete in quality though its quantity is limited. In our group, there are a member of parliament, artists, and a scholar of stone inscriptions. And a person who always gazes and thinks about this and that is also part of us. Although the participants are in different natures and from diverse works, their aim to get to Ava is identical. It has been nearly six hundred years ago that Ava was founded. Besides, Ava stood as the royal capital for four times though ancient Myanmar monarchs used to shift the royal capital from one place to another place according to predestinated events. So, hearing this glorious name “Ava” repeatedly in our ears, at one evening, we left Mandalay (where we put up at) for Ava by jeep.

We have to pass Amarapura first. Then, after taking the route where grove of lettpan (red silk cotton tree) grows in a row for some minutes, the forepart of Ava Bridge is seen. This bridge is built crossing Ayeyyarwady River and heading to Sagaing. The confluence of Ayeyyarwady River and Myitnge River is where Ava is located. The poem “The Golden Ava, our land is so prosperous that it is at the top of the island Jambudipa” illustrates the location and form of Ava.

Before we’d reach the bridge, we turn left and get to a sandbank, where we take a ferry to the other side of the river. When we reach there, the sun already dips down the horizon. We turn back to see the way we took. On the left bank, there are two pagodas in fading lime color and their ornamentals are leaning. In the backyard of these two pagodas, there is an old monastery and a palm tree. Boats are being harbored at water’s edge* in front of those two pagodas. Boats are paddling calmly in the river. We gaze this scenario in the background of sunset. Only for awhile, artists said they would prefer to leave behind here and the rest of us continue to get the place where Ava palace once situated before the sun goes down.

I say the place where Ava palace once situated because the signs of a royal capital can be rarely seen there for it has been a very long time it was established. When we follow cart wheel tracks slowly, the old moat, the old wall, the old tower, the old brick monastery come to the sights of our eyes. These are symbols which indicate Ava was once a prosperous royal capital. But, now, there is no water in the moat, the wall is ruined; some parts of the wall are buried beneath the ground, the tower is leaning to the other side because of earthquake and there is no monk in the brick monastery.

It is remembered that King Tadoeminphyar is the very first King to choose Ava as the royal capital. It might be because of the fact that Ava is surrounded by water which is the natural protection for the capital at that time. Another two reasons might be that Ava is close to 11 districts of agriculture where staple grains and crops are prosperous and the weather is fine. Every dynasty which could receive good foundation mended Ava. As they fixed, Ava was complete with the characteristics of a royal capital. Food supplies were sufficient. Celebrations which adults and young took part were hold. Literary festivals were popular not only in the court but also in countryside. Civilization and culture were improved in every sector.  Among them, the palace built during the reign of King Shwenankyawtshin, the descendent of Tadoeminphyar is included.

The monument of founding the Golden palace in front of the wall of the brick monastery evidences the establishment of that palace by King Shwenankyawtshin. That monument is looked after by the department of Archeology. But the stone inscription is now so ruined that it is difficult for our scholar to read all the facts in it. As much as he can read, we know a little bit about the arrangements in founding the palace; devotion to spirits, sprinkling water endowed with power through recitation, applying a kind of earth mixing with muck, milk, butter, and molasses, playing pipe and bugle, and driving in  a golden stake and a silver stake.

Then, we enter the brick monastery. Its benefactor is Mai Nu, the Chief Queen. That monastery suffered from the effects of earthquake and weather. However, seeing from the pavilion of jorana (gateway), the monastery with its three leveled spire-like roof can be seen without changing among tamarind trees. This monastery still looks impressive with it structures; pinnacles, vertical ornamental embellishments, and flamboyant ornamentals on its roof and arches in the same way of seeing impressively the characteristics of youth which are still left with an old man who was once well built and handsome but is now suffering from getting old, pains and social misery.

We sightsee every parts of that monastery as if there is nothing left to look round. The MP who is with us comments “It had to use a lot of mass participation.” nodding his head. To continue his opinion, ancient monarchs had many palaces built and donated extensively for Sasana. There were times for Ava, when its territories were limited and when clashes between Ava and its neighbor tribes happened. But, when Ava’s domination was all over Myanmar, many rulers could occupy the Ava’s throne. On that throne of Ava, both Myanmar and Shan could sit on in turn. At that time, those rulers had to rely very much on people or peasants.

Of course, when we see there, bushes, banyan trees, fields of corns, peppers and peas, and small thatches can be seen. Beyond that, groves of toddy-palm, farmlands and paddy fields can also be perceived indistinctly. People who rely on those fields are farmers and peasants whose ancestors were also cultivators. They earned a living by plowing, trading salt and fish paste, climbing palm-tree to tap the sap. They also gave levies on what they could do business. Besides, if someone was a single atheta (man of wealth)*, he had to tribute twelve royal measurements; gum of neem tree (Azadirachta indica), plant fiber, bael fruit (Aegle marmelos), Oun-toun-khau (a kind of vine which gives us glutinous gum) etc. When someone was from a section of a certain race or occupation settle, he had just to serve the duty of his section. Because of those men of wealth and members of sections, Ava was magnificent. Because of their colors, Ava was bright.

It’s getting dark. Glinting light appears at Sagaing Hill. We see the artists are finishing their works when we take the route we walked over. They are full with great happiness for they could be able to paint the scenery which appears in their Katina (circular spot to concentrate on) on their sketch pads. They don’t look sorry for missing the chance to see the place where Ava palace once situated. Whether Ava palace is glorious or not, for them, they feel there is nothing to do in its home affairs. They just concentrate on such delightful scenery which will be seen in every evening of winter.

----
Translated by **[Nwe Phyo (Cherryland)](AUTHOR.md)**