# Celebrities-Of-Myanmar

If a person is famous, he or she is called a celebrity. In Oxford learner's dictionary, celebrity means a famous person. In each country, there are many celebrities in politic, economy, diplomacy and other like art, inventions etc. In our country, Myanmar, there are many famous persons and were celebrities in history.

In history or in the past, Dr. Htin Aung (1909-1978), Daw Khin Myo Chit (1915-1999), Retired Secretary-General of United Nations, U Thant (1909-1974), Retired Headmaster of Yangon University, U Phay Maung Tin (1888-1973) and others.

Dr. Htin Aung was born in Bago in May, 1909. He was famous as the Rector of Yangon University and an outstanding wise scholar among the international scholars. He graduated and got degrees in law, geography, economics and anthropology and Doctor of Philosophy in English before World War II. He was well-known all over the world as a scholar or writer who shines in English literature and prose writing and wrote many books about Myanmar's history, literature, culture and traditions. He was termed as a national literaty of history and a defender from Myanmar History. He studied in London School of Economic, Cambridge University and Oxford University and other Universities in French, Irland, and Netherland. He came back to his country Myanmar in 1933 and served the countrie's duties as assistant lecturer, lecturer, professor in English Department and Geology Department, Rector of Yangon University and Vice-Chancellor and Embassador. He wrote many books in English. He was famous in the past and is still famous today in Myanmar's Education. So, he is one of the Myanmar's Celebrities.

----
Daw Khin Myo Chit, one of the Myanmar's Celebrities who have been famous today, was a famous female writer and editor of the Dagon Magazine, The Myanmar Journal and The Oway in Myanmar's literature of 21st century. She was born in Sagain in May, 1915. She started writing short stories in 1934. She graduated from University of Yangon in 1952 and served as Features Editor in The Guardian Daily when she began witing short stories and articles in English. The 13 Carat Diamond which appeared first in The Guardian Daily Magazine was included in Fifty Great Oriental Stories a Bantam Classic published in the U.S.A. and Canada. It was also translated into German, Italian, Gujarati and Yugoslav. Another short story, Her Infinitive Variety, won a Horizone prize in a contest among Asian countries. The Four Puppers, a folk tale, was published in Folk Tales Of Asia, sponsored by the Asian Cultural Centre for UNESCO. She wrote many English Books and her english publications include Anawrahta of Burma, Colorful Burma, Enled, Flowers and Festivals Round the Burmese Year, Stories and Sketches of Myanmar and Quest for Peace, which was serialized in the Working People's Daily while she was on the staff of that paper, is largely autobiographic. Although she died in Yangon in 1999, she has been famous and as a celebrity among Myanmar's literature.
----
WrittenBy PyaePhyo
TypedBy & AnnotatedBy AndreasPannewitz on 2015-07-11
